**Lewis Terman**
================

.. figure:: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/0/0b/Lewis_Madison_Terman.jpg
   :alt: Lewis Terman

   Lewis Terman

Downloaded from `Wikimedia
Commons <https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Lewis_Madison_Terman.jpg>`__

Authors:
--------

Larissa Ward, Farzan Dubash, Alex Blackburn, Bhumika Bhandari, and
Karlyssa Fluttert

Purpose:
--------

*The purpose for this paper is that it is written for Arts 140 class
assignment. It will let students learn more about a specific
psychologist. In the process of doing this assignment, students will
further develop their research, communication and presentation skills.*

Date:
-----

Dec 14, 2018

--------------

Summary:
--------

Lewis Terman is widely regarded as the father of modern IQ testing. His
Stanford-Binet scale helped to revolutionize the testing of children in
order to uncover “giftedness” (Wertheimer & Kimble, 2013). His study of
gifted children, known as “Terman’s Termites,” tracked children he
identified as gifted throughout their lives, with many ending up in
successful positions (Leslie, 2000). Although Terman’s studies were
revolutionary and are still used today, his intentions were not always
the best with his studies. Early on, he was an advocate for eugenics,
claiming that his studies showed that lower intelligence was a
hereditary trait in certain minorities (Martschenko, 2017). Despite
this, his research was extremely useful in the field of intelligence and
it has helped psychologists better pinpoint giftedness in children.

--------------

An Overview of Lewis Terman:
----------------------------

.. raw:: html

   <div>

.. raw:: html

   <iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/1nEbsuquiDw" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen>

.. raw:: html

   </iframe>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

--------------

Personal Life:
--------------

(Mainly adapted from Crosby & Hastorf, 2009)

Lewis Terman was born in Johnson County, Indiana in 1877. Terman was the
12th of 14 children born to a farming family. Most of the children that
Terman went to school with would not study past 8th grade because most
of them would drop out of school to help on the family farm. Terman was
born in an area where a majority of people had a career in farming or
teaching, so there was little to his future that would suggest that
Terman would have a career in anything other than farming or teaching.
Terman was always described to be bookish and ambiguous. Terman was also
said to have an interest in children of unusual abilities or
disabilities from a young age which contributed to his later studies in
intelligence and giftedness (Leslie, 2000).

Beginning in 1892, Terman attended Central Normal College (CNC) in
Danville Indiana for 5 years, where he received a BS, Bpd (Bachelor of
Pedagogy), and an AB. Terman spoke very fondly about his time and the
enjoyment he had while attending CNC. In 1901, Terman then attended
Indiana University. While attending Indiana University, Terman developed
the ambition to become a professor of psychology and contribute to the
discovery of science. In 1903, Terman began graduate work at the Clark
University. Clark University’s requirements encouraged students to
follow their own interests rather than to follow a presubscribed course
of study. Terman found the environment suited his needs well because he
said he never worked well under the restraints of rules and regulations.
While at Clark University, Terman attended `G. Stanley’s
Hall’s <https://www2.clarku.edu/research/archives/archives/g-stanley-hall.cfm>`__
seminars on children psychology every Monday night. These seminars were
deemed to have a great influence on his development of intellectual
intelligence later in life. While at Clark, Terman’s interest of gifted
and defective children began to expand, leading him into an interest of
mental testing. Terman first introduced his idea to pursue the field of
mental testing to G. Stanley Hall, but Hall empathetically expressed his
disapproval for mental testing to Terman. Given that Terman’s mind was
made up and he was determined, Hall eventually granted his blessing to
Terman and gave him some advice about advancing into a new field of
study. Terman created his thesis on bright and dull children and focused
on the different tests that could help to differentiate the children.

Terman was later troubled by “mildly active tuberculosis” causing him to
choose a position in California in the interest of his health with his
wife and two kids (Leslie, 2000). He began his career in California as a
school principal in San Bernardino for a year. After that, he spent four
years as a professor of child study and pedagogy at Los Angeles State
Normal School (Leslie, 2000). In 1910, Terman accepted a position in the
school of Education at `Stanford
University <https://stanfordmag.org/contents/the-vexing-legacy-of-lewis-terman>`__.
Terman later said that his acceptance of the job had led to an ideal
time in his life and career. Later Terman was granted as chair of the
psychology department at Stanford for two decades. Terman remained at
Stanford University until his death in 1956 (Leslie, 2000).

--------------

Major Research and Theories:
----------------------------

Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scales:
-----------------------------------

*Summary*:

*Lewis Terman made revisions to the Alfred Binet Intelligence Scale
which made the previously developed scale more adaptable to adults.
Prior to his revisions, the scale only went up to age 15 (Lewis M.
Terman, 1916). Terman used the intelligence quotient to categorized
people’s intelligence. Terman viewed people as having IQ as “fairly
constant with changing age” (Boring, 1956). This led to the conclusion
of testing children to find ones that had high IQ, who were going to be
high in society (Minton, n.d.). Thus, this lead Terman’s purpose of his
tests to coincide with the eugenics movement and lead to his further
research of gifted children.*

One of Lewis Terman’s most significant contributions to psychology was
his revisions to the `Binet-Simon Intelligence
Scales <https://www.hmhco.com/~/media/sites/home/hmh-assessments/clinical/stanford-binet/pdf/sb5_asb_1.pdf?la=en>`__,
now called the Stanford Binet Scale, or Intelligence Quotient scale. The
intelligence scale was first developed by
`Alfred <https://www.britannica.com/biography/Alfred-Binet>`__
`Binet <https://books.google.ca/books?hl=en&lr=&id=FYMfAgAAQBAJ&oi=fnd&pg=PA67&dq=Alfred+binet+biography+&ots=q5X_UNUytd&sig=tmyeNFGcav11ivXj1CVq9c9hIMo#v=onepage&q=Alfred%20binet%20biography&f=false>`__
and `Theodore Simon <https://www.intelltheory.com/simon.shtml>`__ in
1905 called the Binet-Simon Scale (Wertheimer & Kimble, 2013). The
original purpose of the study was to be able to identify and accurately
diagnose sub-normality children; children with learning disabilities in
order to help them.

.. figure:: https://cdn.lifepersona.com/alfred-binet-biography-and-work-of-the-father-of-the-test-of-intelligence/alfred-binet-biography-and-work-of-the-father-of-the-test-of-intelligence-3.jpg
   :alt: Binet Measuring and Testing Children

   Binet Measuring and Testing Children

Downloaded from `Life
Persona <https://www.lifepersona.com/alfred-binet-biography-and-work-of-the-father-of-the-test-of-intelligence>`__

Binet thought that there were 2 things that could lead someone to have a
deficiency in school performance. First, he said that a child may lack
in school performance because they initially are not intelligent,
lacking the right genes. Second, he said that a child might not perform
in school as well because of life circumstances that have hindered their
ability to have similar intelligence to others of the same age. He also
believed that “intelligence was a capacity that grows with children’s
ages but at varying individual rates” (Wertheimer & Kimble, 2013). Thus,
Alfred and Simon came up with 30 tasks for kids ages 3-15 to determine
intelligence scales dependent on the child's age. The tasks consisted of
“identifying the differences in memory, ability to reason, ability to
compare, comprehension, time orientation, number concepts, power to
combine ideas into meaningful wholes, and the maturity of apperception”
(Lewis M. Terman, 1916) [To read more about Binet-Simon Method see
“\ `The Measurement of
Intelligence <https://archive.org/details/measurementofint008006mbp/page/n9>`__\ ”
by Lewis Terman – Chapter III or see the book) *The Development of
Intelligence in Children (The Binet-Simon Scale)* by Binet and Simon]
Meaning, the ability to use logic and reasoning in order to solve
problems. This laid the groundwork for Lewis Terman's revisions.

Lewis Terman took the Binet-Simon Scale and found that it had flaws
because it didn't address “higher mental level” (Lewis M. Terman, 1916).
Terman wanted to improve the scale and to do so, Terman took years
studying and testing varying levels of people’s intelligence including
children in schools, business men, unemployed men, and high school
students [To read more about the tests conducted by Terman see “\ `The
Measurement of
Intelligence <https://archive.org/details/measurementofint008006mbp/page/n9>`__\ ”
by Lewis Terman – Chapter IV]

With the extensive testing, Terman used the term Intelligence Quotient,
IQ to determine a scale of intelligence. The Intelligence Quotient was
originally developed by `William
Stern <https://www.intelltheory.com/stern.shtml>`__ however, due to
Terman’s success with the extensive testing which improved the tests for
mental age, he showed that “IQ is indeed fairly constant with changing
age, at least when cultural influences are also constant” (Boring,
1956). The Intelligence Quotient was a scale that gave people’s
intelligence based on their mental age, divided (hence intelligence
“quotient”) by their chronological age multiplied by 100.

.. figure:: https://s3.amazonaws.com/s3.timetoast.com/public/uploads/photos/3471444/intelligence_age.gif?1360254213
   :alt: Intelligence Quotient

   Intelligence Quotient

Downloaded from `Time
Toast <https://www.timetoast.com/timelines/history-of-physcology_taylor-c>`__

Mental age referred to an individual’s ability to use logic and problem
solving. This was then measured against, the data found through testing
many people to find, the traditional/normal range of that person’s
mental age for the chronological age they were. A person who was
“normal” for their age would have an IQ of 100 and was called to have a
“general intelligence” (Leslie, 2000), anyone below was considered to
have a problem and was called “feeble-minded” (Boring, 1956) and anyone
who was significantly higher was considered gifted. This allowed for a
standard scoring scale which was used in schools to assess students’
abilities. It was also used in World War 1 by Terman making specific
tests to screen army recruits (Leslie, 2000). Being that this new way of
testing was so applicable to a wide variety of people, it started to be
more known by the general public and gained public acceptance.

.. figure:: http://image.wikifoundry.com/image/3/8a8b19511382ae73a03386604860e8a4/GW452H172
   :alt: IQ Scale

   IQ Scale

Downloaded from `Hmolpedia <http://www.eoht.info/page/IQ>`__

However, Terman viewed people to be born with a pre-set of intelligence,
meaning intelligence was based on genetics; not based on home
environment or education this was called “original endowment” (Leslie,
2000). This thought that intelligence was hereditary, contributed to
Terman’s belief in eugenics. According to Webster’s Dictionary,
“\ `eugenics <https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/eugenics>`__ is
when one wants to improve the human race by selecting certain humans to
breed in a certain populations (and sterilizing the ones that do not fit
in this category) in order to improve the population’s genetic
composition.” With this thought of eugenics, Terman’s purpose for the IQ
testing was to find the children who naturally had high IQ and prepare
them for higher paying jobs and to be leaders within society (Minton,
n.d.) and the ones who had lower IQ scores would be institutionalized
and discouraged or prevented from having children (Leslie, 2000). With
the increased acceptance/awareness of IQ testing and Terman’s purpose
for IQ testing it led to the furtherment of the eugenics movement and
eventually it led him the study of the identification of gifted
children.

Genetic Studies Of Genius:
--------------------------

*Summary*:

*In 1921 Lewis Terman conducted a study called The Genetic studies of
Genius. He followed the lives of children who had a high degree of IQ
(130 or above). This study is the oldest and the longest running
longitudinal study in the discipline of Psychology. Terman called these
students Termites. These children tended to be healthier, taller, high
on self-confidence and more socially adapted than other children. They
were assumed to be successful in life as they grew up. This study was
criticized for taking samples from higher socioeconomic strata and less
representation of minorities. (Genetic Studies of Geniuses ~ Lewis
Terman)*

`The Genetic Studies of
Genius <https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.157060/page/n>`__,
by Lewis Terman is the oldest and longest-running longitudinal study in
the field of psychology. It began in 1921 at Stanford University to
scrutinize the characteristics of gifted children (Leslie, 2000). A
gifted child is one who naturally has a high degree of general mental
ability or extraordinary ability in a specific activity. Giftedness in
many countries is identified or defined by person with IQ equivalent to
130-140. However, educational institutions used a wide array of measures
to define giftedness, it includes aptitude in musical,
verbal-mathematical, spatial-visual and interpersonal abilities (Gifted
child psychology, Encyclopedia Britannica).

Terman followed the lifestyle of 1500 highly intellectual students (3-19
years old). These children were overwhelmingly white and from middle
/upper-class urban areas. Terman referred to these gifted children as
Termites. Many people assumed that gifted children would grow up to be
awkward and shy adults who would not be able to succeed as it was said,
“\ `early to ripe, early to
rot <https://idioms.thefreedictionary.com/early+ripe%2C+early+rotten>`__.”
However it was found that these children were successful in life, they
tended to be healthier, taller and more socially adapted than other
kids. Terman assumed that the children with high IQ would grow up into
an elite group. These children also had better health as they aged and
were more successful as a group. They completed higher education at a
much higher rate compared to the average. Women had fewer children and
had them later in life as they chased higher degrees. The gifted group
was financially better than any comparison group. As Terman followed
this group for 35 years, they showed an impressive array of
accomplishments: Of just the gifted males; 70 were listed in *`American
Men of
Science <http://science.sciencemag.org/content/111/2895/699.1>`__*, 3
were elected to *`National Academy of
Sciences <http://www.nasonline.org>`__*, 10 entered in the *Directory of
American Scholars* and 31 appeared in Who’s Who in America (Terman, L,
1959).

In the later part of the Genetic study of Genius, aided by his
assistants, Terman conducted interviews with the parents of gifted
children and he also interviewed the gifted children. In these
interviews there was a wide variety of tests and inventories tested.
Data was collected in 1922 and 1928 which had family life and school
experience as the focal point; it involved interviews and questionnaires
involving mothers of gifted children. The follow-ups in 1936 and 1940
occurred at the time of educational achievement and commencement of
adult careers for many of the participants. The postwar years through
the 1960s was the period of marriage and family development, career
beginnings, and accomplishments. The data collected in the postwar years
relied mainly on survey forms mailed to the study members. The files of
the collected data from the study members included a rich selection of
other data: news clippings, interviewing the parent, questionnaires from
spouses, and letters.

It was estimated that Termites did not come close in calibre to the true
scientific elite of the same nation and era. In the book, *Greatness:
Who Makes History and Why*, Dean Simonton said,

Let us give Terman the benefit of the doubt and post that all 2,000
scientific and technical publications were produced by the 70 who made
it into American Men of Science. That implies that, on average, Terman’s
notable scientists produced about 29 publications by the time they had
reached their mid-40s. In contrast American Nobel laureates in the
sciences averaged about 38 publications by the time they were 39 years
old, and claimed about 59 publications by their mid-40s. That amounts to
a twofold disparity in the output. Hence, Terman’s intellectual elite
was not of the same calibre as the true scientific elite of the same
nation and era (Simonton, D, 1944).

It was also believed that accomplishments of the study of Termites could
have been predicted on their socioeconomic strata alone. This was
thought because there were mostly white, middle to upper middle-class
men which would already have more opportunities and resources. Also,
Terman included very few minorities in his sample to be specific, only 4
Japanese students, 1 black child, 1 Indian child and 1 Mexican child in
a total of 168,000. Teachers at that time were biased towards
identifying white students with talent because many other talented
students weren’t given the chance to take his test. It was noted by
Terman that minority groups like; Italian, Portuguese and Mexican in
California had low IQ at that time (Lewis M. Terman, 1926). The follow –
up data from The Genetic study of Genius included 1,023 participants,
according to which early reading was linked with academic success, it
was less associated with lifelong educational attainment and was hardly
related to midlife adjustment. Early school entry was associated with
less educational attainment, worse midlife adjustment and even increased
mortality risk (Kern & Friedman, 2008).

--------------

Other Research and Theories:
----------------------------

Sex And Personality:
--------------------

*Summary*:

*Lewis Terman attempted to measure the variability of
masculinity-femininity in personality with the help of the
Masculinity-Femininity test. Women and men are always considered to be
different. This study proposes that women experience greater degree of
emotions. The test is a pencil and paper test, with no specific time
limit. People who deviate from the score range tend to have a romantic
relationship with same sex person (Terman & Miles, 1936).*

This intensive study by Lewis Terman tends to use an experiential scale
to assess the variable of masculinity-femininity. It was conjectured
that men and women, as distinct groups, display differences in their sex
and characteristics in their behavior which have a great impact on their
personality. Many social trends have attempted to reduce these deeply
embedded differences in society and in the minds of the mankind (Terman
& Miles, 1936). The enfranchisement of women and the rapid expansion of
their role in political (in 20th century), commercial and other fields
proved that these differences are less in magnitude than they thought to
be. In modern Western cultures, women are assumed to experience tender
emotions like pity, sympathy and parental love. As compared to males,
females are more timid, religious, prone to jealousy and suspicious. The
sexual feelings of women are less meticulously localized in their body
(Terman & Miles, 1936).

The purpose of the test was concealed by the title “Attitude and
Interest Test” in order to prevent the participants to have any bias
response; it allowed the results to not be manipulated by the subjects.
The Masculinity–femininity test had two identical parts A and B which in
total consists of 910 items. The test was a pencil-paper test with no
specified time limit. Each response bears a weight of one point and can
be ‘+’or ‘-’. Scoring of the test was done by a stencil thus it was
completely objective. People who deviate from the test range scores are
assumed to be indulged in a romantic attachment with people of same sex
(Terman & Miles, 1936).

Psychological Factors In Marital Happiness:
-------------------------------------------

*Summary*:

*Another study Lewis Terman was to test if one could predict `marital
happiness <https://www.jstor.org/stable/3347885?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents>`__.
The tests got the scores of happiness and related them statistically to
various supposed contributors to marital happiness (Daniel, 1940). It
was found that the thought contributors to marital happiness, did not
have as much correlation. However, it was found that childhood happiness
and if the spouse was generally a happy person contributed somewhat to
marital happiness. There was no one factor that determines the
prediction of marital happiness.*

In this study by Lewis Terman tested 792 couples who were married and
109 couples who were divorced. The goal was to find out if there was a
way to predict marital happiness. Lewis Terman used personality tests
and responses to questions to measure happiness. The criteria for
happiness was based on the tests conducted which became the scale of
happiness. This scale however was disproportional because the answers
all tended toward the extreme happiness. Terman compared his results of
a person’s happiness compared to 4 factors that might affect a marriage.
The factors were, “degree of marital happiness, personality
characteristics, background factors, and sexual attitudes and
adjustments” (Daniel, 1940). Terman wanted to see the correlation
between how happy an individual person felt compared to factors of
marital happiness (L. M. Terman, Buttenwieser, Ferguson, Johnson, &
Wilson, 1938). Through the tests they got the scores of happiness and
related them statistically to various supposed contributors to marital
happiness (Daniel, 1940). The conclusions they made from their findings
was that the causes or factors that were thought to have an impact on
marital happiness didn’t have as much impact as they thought. For
example, the value of differences in ages, or in education between
spouses, or sexual relations has much less of an impact than anticipated
(Daniel, 1940). It was found that if the individuals, husband or wife,
were happy, together as a couple, they would have a happier
relationship. The study also found that factors of childhood happiness,
attachment/relationship to mothers and fathers, and childhood punishment
had a role on happy marriages (Daniel, 1940). However, these
relationships gave correlational factors to marital happiness there was
no one single causal factor found to marital happiness. This is because
marital happiness is much more complex than correlating tests.

--------------

Criticism:
----------

.. figure:: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/e/e3/United_States_eugenics_advocacy_poster.jpg
   :alt: In the early 1900s, the eugenics movement began to gain
   traction in the US.

   In the early 1900s, the eugenics movement began to gain traction in
   the US.

Downloaded from
`Wikimedia <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Eugenics_supporters_hold_signs_on_Wall_Street.jpg>`__

Throughout his academic career, Lewis Terman did a lot of work to
further studies of intelligence, completely changing how we view
“gifted” individuals. However, some of his ideas were also extremely
problematic. In his earlier academic years, Terman supported eugenics,
advocating the sterilization of those that he referred to as “feeble
minded” in order to produce a more intelligent society. When he improved
the Stanford-Binet scale, he claimed that one of the primary uses was
“curtailing the reproduction of feeble-mindedness and in the elimination
of an enormous amount of crime, pauperism, and industrial inefficiency”
(White, 2000). He was also a member of the `Human Betterment
Foundation <https://embryo.asu.edu/pages/human-betterment-foundation-1928-1942>`__,
an American eugenics organization that advocated for forced
sterilization and created publicity towards research into sterilizations
carried out in California. In 1928, he stated that “It is more
important, for man to acquire control over his biological evolution than
to capture the energy of the atom” (Wang, 2016). Although Terman backed
away from these concepts later on in life, he never publicly recanted
these beliefs and statements (Cherry, 2018).

In addition to these arguments supporting eugenics, Terman also believed
that intelligence varied by race and advocated for segregation. In his
`book published in
1916 <https://books.google.ca/books/about/The_Measurement_of_Intelligence_1916.html?id=Kk3zNwAACAAJ&redir_esc=y>`__,
he wrote that:

High-grade or borderline deficiency … is very, very common among
Spanish-Indian and Mexican families of the Southwest and also among
Negroes. Their dullness seems to be racial, or at least inherent in the
family stocks from which they come … Children of this group should be
segregated into separate classes … They cannot master abstractions but
they can often be made into efficient workers … from a eugenic point of
view they constitute a grave problem because of their unusually prolific
breeding (Martschenko, 2017).

He also chose to emphasize the need to stick to established gender
norms, through a questionnaire that determined gender based on
motivational and emotional traits that were thought to differentiate the
sexes.

In his genetics study of genius, Terman’s approach was extremely flawed,
given the fact that those he studied were primarily white, urban and
from middle class families. It lacked balance, featuring only two
African-Americans, six Japanese Americans and one Indian-American
(Leslie, 2000). This lack of diversity meant that the studied was not as
comprehensive as it should have been to capture the true information
around gifted children. At the time, teachers, like most of the world,
were likely more biased towards these white, middle class students,
already giving them a learning advantage.

Terman also had a feud with a journalist named `Walter
Lippmann <https://www.britannica.com/biography/Walter-Lippmann>`__, who
argued that it was impossible to classify human beings using a single
test. Lippmann referred to Terman and other intelligence-testers as “the
psychological battalion of death”, due to the fact that these tests were
used to shape and decide the future of a child. Lippmann wrote that he
hated the “sense of superiority that it creates, the sense of
inferiority it imposes” (Leslie, 2000), referring to the culture created
by classifying people by intelligence. Terman would eventually prevail
in this feud, in the sense that the popularity and use of intelligence
testing continued to increase over time.

--------------

Current Research on Theories:
-----------------------------

This component of the biography focuses on other/ current research on
intelligence that is in some way different from Terman’s research. It
will largely be a summary of Robert J. Sternberg’s summary of
intelligence research titled “Theories of Intelligence” (2018). This is
done due to the abundance of information in the summary presented by
Sternberg and a lack of information on relevant other/ current theories
and research on intelligence elsewhere. Although this component largely
reflects Sternberg’s summary, it was intended to be presented in a more
concise manner, highlighting the important research. Also, connections
are made between the different research on intelligence that Sternberg
includes in his summary, as well as connections between the research on
intelligence and Terman’s research and ideas.

In 1986, when 24 cognitive psychologists were asked what intelligence
is, they emphasized four concepts (Sternberg, 2018). The first was the
ability to learn from experience, the second the ability to adapt to the
environment, the third was
`metacognitive <https://cft.vanderbilt.edu/guides-sub-pages/metacognition/>`__
properties-the ability to understand and control one’s own thinking
process, and the fourth was the role of culture-that what is considered
intelligent in one culture may differ from what is considered
intelligent in another culture (as cited in Sternberg, 2018). The
opinions of lay people may also be relevant to the study of
intelligence, such as societies folk conceptions and implicit theories
on intelligence (Sternberg, 2018). For example, a smart salesperson and
a smart neurosurgeon may be perceived as having different qualities
(Sternberg, 2018).

The first intelligence researcher that will be discussed is `Francis
Galton <https://www.nytimes.com/2002/02/10/books/chapters/a-life-of-sir-francis-galton.html>`__.
Galton believed that intelligence is a function of psychophysical
abilities (Sternberg, 2018). Like Terman, Galton believed in using
standardized tests to measure abilities. Galton measured a broad range
of psychophysical skills, such as the ability to notice small
differences in the weights of objects, the ability to notice small
changes in pitch or tone, and physical strength (as cited in Sternberg,
2018). Galton was also like Terman in his support of the eugenics
movement. Galton was a cousin of Charles Darwin, the famous founder of
evolutionary biology, which inspired Galton into investigations of human
heredity (Gillham, 2002). Galton ended up inventing `pedigree
analysis <http://galton.org/psychologist/>`__, which sought to measure
the heritability of human talent and character (Gillham, 2002).

The next researcher who did important work in intelligence was Alfred
Binet. Binet was tasked with developing a test to distinguish typically
developing children from intellectually disabled children (as cited in
Sternberg, 2018). He and his research assistant Theodore Simon developed
the Binet-Simon Scale to address the cognitive ability of children by
assigning them a mental age, which was the average performance of
children of that age (Sternberg, 2018). The Binet-Simon scale was later
updated by Terman and labelled the Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale,
whose main purpose was to be a general intelligence test (“Alfred
Binet”, 2015). The Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale became an important
part of the eugenics movement (“Alfred Binet”, 2015), which Terman
supported. Theoretically, Binet thought that judgement was the key
component of intelligence. Binet asserted that intelligence composed
three distinct categories (as cited in Sternberg, 2018). The first is
direction, which involves knowing what must be done and how to do it,
the second is adaptation, which involves forming a strategy for
completing a task and then monitoring that strategy while implementing
it, and the third is criticism, which is the ability to critique your
own thoughts (Sternberg, 2018). All three of these categories fit with
contemporary views of intelligence (Sternberg, 2018). Current research
that correlates with Binet’s categories is research on global and local
planning. Global planning involves encoding the problem and formulating
a general strategy to attack the problem (Sternberg, 2018), which
correlates with Binet’s concept of direction. Local planning involves
forming and implementing strategies for the details of the task
(Sternberg, 2018), which correlates with Binet’s concept of adaptation.
Research has found that those who score higher on intelligence tests
take more time for global planning during task completion but take less
time for local planning (as cited in Sternberg, 2018). Sternberg
concludes that: “The advantage for spending more time on global planning
is the increased likelihood that the overall strategy will be correct”
(Sternberg, 2018). Also, Binet’s concept of criticism correlates with
modern conceptions that metacognition is important in understanding
intelligence (Sternberg, 2018). Unlike Terman, Binet noted that
intelligence encompasses more than what IQ tests can measure. Binet’s
early work was not without controversy though. He started his career
studying `hysterical
patients <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19569443>`__, and asserted
that “I believe it satisfactorily established, in a general way, that
two states of consciousness, not known to each other, can co-exist in
the mind of a hysterical patient” (Van der Hart & Dorahy, 2010).

Another model of intelligence is the hierarchical, or ranked model. The
hierarchical model suggests that there are two forms of intelligence,
fluid ability and crystalized ability. Fluid ability is the speed and
accuracy of abstract reasoning, and crystalized ability is the
accumulation of knowledge and vocabulary (as cited in Sternberg, 2018).
In addition to fluid and crystalized ability, recent hierarchical models
propose that learning and memory processes, visual perception, auditory
perception, and effortless production of ideas are also relevant to the
study of intelligence (Sternberg, 2018).

The biological view of intelligence looks to the brain as the basis for
human intelligence (as cited in Sternberg, 2018). There has been found
to be a modest but statistically significant association between brain
size and intelligence (as cited in Sternberg, 2018) but is not clear
whether larger brain size causes intelligence or intelligence causes
larger brain size, or whether the relationship is contingent on an
unknown third factor (Sternberg, 2018). The way the brain metabolizes
glucose may also be relevant for understanding the biological basis of
intelligence. Higher intelligence correlates with lower levels of
glucose metabolism during problem solving tasks (as cited in Sternberg,
2018). Interestingly, as a result of practice, participants with higher
intelligence doing a problem-solving task show less glucose metabolism
in most brain areas but increased glucose metabolism in areas of the
brain that are thought to be important to the task (Sternberg, 2018).
Therefore, “more intelligent participants have learned how to use their
brains more efficiently” (Sternberg, 2018). Brain regions that have been
correlated with intelligence are the posterior regions, which have been
implicated in crystalized intelligence. Damage to these regions results
in poor performance on IQ tests (as cited in Sternberg, 2018), which
generally measure crystalized intelligence (Sternberg, 2018).
Participants with frontal lobe damage perform well on these tests, but
have impairments in fluid intelligence (as cited in Sternberg, 2018).
These biological studies are largely correlational; they show
associations between biological measures and measures of intelligence,
but they do not establish causation (Sternberg, 2018). Terman would
probably support the biological view because he believed that
intelligence was mostly inherited genetically.

Contextualism states that culture is relevant to intelligence, asserting
that intelligence must be understood in a real-world and cultural
context (Sternberg, 2018). For example, differences in intelligence have
been observed in rural versus urban communities, low versus high
proportions of teenagers to adults in communities, and communities of
different socioeconomic statuses (as cited in Sternberg, 2018).
Contextualism accounts for why some people perform better than others on
tasks that a culture values (as cited in Sternberg, 2018). It seems to
take into account that our social goals determine what our mental
capabilities will be. Therefore, the demands on cognition to reach an
individual’s goals may differ from culture to culture. For example,
“people from European and North American cultures tend to process
objects independently of the context, whereas people from many Asian
cultures process objects in conjunction with the surrounding context”
(as cited in Sternberg, 2018). Also, people from collectivist cultures
are less likely to commit the fundamental attribution error (Myers,
Spencer, and Jordan, 2015), signalling that they interpret events
differently than those in individualist cultures. Developing culturally
relevant tests aims to combat the assumption that intelligence is the
same in all cultures. For example, 14-year-old boys performed poorly on
a task when it was framed as a cupcake-baking task but performed well
when it was framed as a battery charging task (as cited in Sternberg,
2018). Also, Brazilian maids had no difficulty with proportional
reasoning when hypothetically purchasing food, but great difficulty with
the same task when it was purchasing medicinal herbs (as cited in
Sternberg, 2018). These studies show that the context of which a task is
presented greatly affects performance on that task (Sternberg, 2018).
Contextualism seems to counter Terman’s beliefs. Terman believed in
eugenics, and that intelligence was mostly inherited genetically, while
contextualism tries to account for the intelligence of different
cultures on culturally relevant tasks.

The last theory of relevance to other/ current theories of intelligence
is Sternberg’s triarchic theory of successful intelligence. Sternberg
notes that “According to this theory, intelligence comprises three
aspects: dealing with the relation of intelligence (a) to the internal
world of the person, (b) to experience, and (c) to the external world.”
(Sternberg, 2018). The “internal world” part of the theory emphasizes
information processing and separates information processing into three
distinct components. The first is metacognitive abilities, the second is
lower-level processes used to carry out the task, and the third is
knowledge acquisition, or the learning of how to do a problem in the
first place (Sternberg, 2018). The “experience” part of the theory
states that we all have varying familiarity with different tasks and
that the more familiar a task is the more automatic it’s completion
becomes (Sternberg, 2018). Sternberg asserts that familiar tasks and
novel tasks make different demands on intelligence (Sternberg, 2018).
The “external world” part of the theory states that intelligence serves
three functions in the real-world: To allow the individual to adapt to
existing environments, shape existing environments to create new
environments, and to select new environments (Sternberg, 2018). To test
the usefulness of the triarchic theory, Sternberg and colleagues
performed a study that matched students abilities (either high in
analytical, creative, or practical ability) with instructional designs
geared to teach the student in their preferred ability. They found that
students high in one ability who were matched with instructional design
that taught to that ability outperformed students who were mismatched
(Sternberg, 2018). For example, “A high-analytical student placed in an
instructional condition that emphasized analytical thinking outperformed
a high-analytical student placed in an instructional condition that
emphasized practical thinking.” (Sternberg, 2018).

--------------

Bibliography:
-------------

Alfred Binet (1857-1911). (2015, July 27) Retrieved from
https://www.goodtherapy.org/famous-psychologists/alfred-binet.html

Boring, E. (1956). *Biographical Memoir*. Washington D.C: National
Academy of Science. Retrieved from
http://nasonline.org/publications/biographical-memoirs/memoir-pdfs/terman-lewis.pdf

Bosco, S. (2017, May 15). Alfred Binet: Biography and Work of the Father
of the Test of Intelligence. Retrieved December 9, 2018, from
https://www.lifepersona.com/alfred-binet-biography-and-work-of-the-father-of-the-test-of-intelligence/alfred-binet-biography-and-work-of-the-father-of-the-test-of-intelligence/alfred-binet-biography-and-work-of-the-father-of-the-test-of-intelligence-3

*Child. Stanford University Press*. Retrieved from:
https://archive.org/stream/giftedgroupatmid011505mbp/giftedgroupatmid011505mbp_djvu.txt

Cherry, K. (2018, April 4). Lewis Terman Biography. Retrieved November
7, 2018, from
https://www.verywellmind.com/lewis-terman-biography-2795523

Crosby, J. R., & Hastorf, A. H. (2009). Portraits of Pioneers in
Psychology. Retrieved November 5, 2018, from
https://books.google.ca/books?hl=en&lr=&id=bIZ5AgAAQBAJ&oi=fnd&pg=PA137&dq=biography%20of%20lewis%20terman&ots=Ojo3Pbq68G&sig=gxS9SggOxdNSQSmC6GwE2WosNr4#v=onepage&q=biography%20of%20lewis%20terman&f=false

Daniel, K. (1940). The Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly, 18(3), 301–304
https://doi.org/10.2307/3347885

*Genetic Studies Of Genius Volume Ii The Early Mental Traits Of Three
Hundred Geniuses*: Lewis M. Terman: Free Download, Borrow, and
Streaming. (1970, January 01). Retrieved from
https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.157060/page/n9

Gillham, N.W (2002, February 10) ‘A Life of Sir Francis Galton’. *The
New York Times*. Retrieved from
https://www.nytimes.com/2002/02/10/books/chapters/a-life-of-sir-francis-galton.html

IQ. (n.d.). Retrieved December 9, 2018, from
http://www.eoht.info/page/IQ

Kern, M.L., & Friedman, H.S. (2008). Early educational milestones as
predictors of lifelong academic achievement, midlife adjustment, and
longevity. *Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology*, 30, 419-430.
Retrieved from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2713445/

Leslie, M. (2000, August). The Vexing Legacy of Lewis Terman. Retrieved
November 2, 2018, from
https://stanfordmag.org/contents/the-vexing-legacy-of-lewis-terman

Lewis Madison Terman.jpeg. (1923). Retrieved November 8, 2018, from
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Lewis_Madison_Terman.jpg

Martschenko, D. (2017, October 11). IQ tests have a dark, controversial
history — but they’re finally being used for good. Retrieved November 7,
2018, from
https://www.businessinsider.com/iq-tests-dark-history-finally-being-used-for-good-2017-10

Minton, H. (n.d.). Lewis Terman (1877–1956). Retrieved November 2, 2018,
from
http://education.stateuniversity.com/pages/2499/Terman-Lewis-1877-1956.html

Myers, D. G., Spencer, S. J., and Jordan, C. H. (2015). Social
Psychology. Canada: McGraw-Hill Ryerson

Sex And Personality Studies In Masculinity And Femininity: Lewis Terman
and Catharine Cox Miles: Free Download, Borrow, and Streaming. (1970,
January 01). Retrieved from
https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.75333/page/n15

Simonton, D. (1994). *Greatness: Who Makes History and Why*. The
Guilford Press.

Sternberg, R. J. (2018). Theories of intelligence. In S. I. Pfeiffer, E.
Shaunessy-Dedrick, & M. Foley-Nicpon (Eds.), *APA handbooks in
psychology. APA handbook of giftedness and talent* (pp. 145-161).
Washington, DC, US: American Psychological Association.

Terman, L. M., Buttenwieser, P., Ferguson, L. W., Johnson, W. B., &
Wilson, D. P. (1938). *Psychological Factors in Marital Happiness*. New
York, NY, US: McGraw-Hill. Retrieved from
http://psycnet.apa.org/record/1939-00457-000

Terman, Lewis M. (1916). *The Measurement Of Intelligence*. Houghton
Mifflin Company. Retrieved from
https://archive.org/details/measurementofint008006mbp/page/n9

Lewis M. Terman. (1926). *Genetic Studies Of Genius Volume I Mental And
Physical Traits Of A Thousand Gifted Children.* Stanford University
Press. Retrieved from
https://archive.org/details/geneticstudiesof009044mbp/page/n5

\_Terman, L. (1959).*The Gifted Group at Mid-Life: Thirty-five Years
Follow-up of the Superior*

Terman, L.M., & Miles, C.C. (1936). *Sex and Personality*. New Haven,
CT, US: Yale University Press. Retrieved from:
https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.75333/page/n15

Traina, R. R. (2005). G. Stanley Hall: Clark University's First
President. Retrieved December 10, 2018, from
https://www2.clarku.edu/research/archives/archives/g-stanley-hall.cfm

Van der Hart, O., & Dorahy, M. (2010) Dissociation and the Dissociative
Disorders: DSM-V and Beyond. Taylor & Francis.

Wang, C. (2016, December 7). Stanford’s history with eugenics. Retrieved
November 7, 2018, from
https://www.stanforddaily.com/2016/12/07/stanfords-history-with-eugenics/

Wertheimer, M., & Kimble, G. A. (2013). *Portraits of Pioneers in
Psychology* (Vol. 3). Psychology Press. Retrieved from
https://books.google.ca/books?hl=en&lr=&id=FYMfAgAAQBAJ&oi=fnd&pg=PA67&dq=alfred+binet+biography&ots=q5XXTGSCvm&sig=_AQppLes0IeUEOurBDirqntHZus#v=onepage&q=alfred%20binet%20biography&f=false

White, S. (2000). Conceptual foundations of IQ testing. *Psychology,
Public Policy, and Law*, 6(1), 33-43.

--------------

Further Readings:
-----------------

G.Stanley Hall: https://www2.clarku.edu/research/archives/archives/g-stanley-hall.cfm
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Stanford University: https://stanfordmag.org/contents/the-vexing-legacy-of-lewis-terman
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

History of Binet-Simon Intelligence Scales: https://www.hmhco.com/~/media/sites/home/hmh-assessments/clinical/stanford-binet/pdf/sb5_asb_1.pdf?la=en
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

More information on Alfred Binet:
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

https://www.britannica.com/biography/Alfred-Binet
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

https://books.google.ca/books?hl=en&lr=&id=FYMfAgAAQBAJ&oi=fnd&pg=PA67&dq=Alfred+binet+biography+&ots=q5X_UNUytd&sig=tmyeNFGcav11ivXj1CVq9c9hIMo#v=onepage&q=Alfred%20binet%20biography&f=false - Chapter 5
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Theodore Simon: https://www.intelltheory.com/simon.shtml
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

For more Information on Binet and Simon's work:\ `https://archive.org/details/measurementofint008006mbp/page/n9 <https://archive.org/details/measurementofint008006mbp/page/n>`__ - Chapter III
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Binet, A., & Simon, T. (1916). The Development of Intelligence in Children (The Binet-Simon Scale) (E. S. Kite, Trans.). Baltimore, MD, US: Williams & Wilkins Co.
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

More about tests conducted by Terman: https://archive.org/details/measurementofint008006mbp/page/n9 - Chapter IV
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

William Stern: https://www.intelltheory.com/stern.shtml
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Eugenics: https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/eugenics
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The Genetic Studies of Genius: https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.157060/page/n9
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The definition of "early to ripe, early to rot": https://idioms.thefreedictionary.com/early+ripe%2C+early+rotten
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

American Men of Science: http://science.sciencemag.org/content/111/2895/699.1
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

National Academy of Science: http://www.nasonline.org
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Marital Happiness: https://www.jstor.org/stable/3347885?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Human Betterment Foundation"\ https://embryo.asu.edu/pages/human-betterment-foundation-1928-1942
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The Measurement of Intelligence:(Written by Lewis Terman in 1916):\ https://books.google.ca/books?id=AaZeDwAAQBAJ
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Walter Lippmann Bio:\ https://www.britannica.com/biography/Walter-Lippmann
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Metacognitive: https://cft.vanderbilt.edu/guides-sub-pages/metacognition/
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Francis Galton: https://www.nytimes.com/2002/02/10/books/chapters/a-life-of-sir-francis-galton.html
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Pedigree Analysis: https://www.nytimes.com/2002/02/10/books/chapters/a-life-of-sir-francis-galton.html
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Hysterical Patients: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19569443
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Here is a video with further information about Lewis Terman: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bzzL6S1sz7A
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

An article “75 Years Later, Study Still Tracking Geniuses”: https://www.nytimes.com/1995/03/07/science/75-years-later-study-still-tracking-geniuses.html
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''
