Gustav Theodor Fechner
======================

**Authors: Sukhmani sengar, Andrea Cretu, Manvir Singh Judge, Gulay
Emin, Eden Barr, Carter Little**

**December 14th, 2018**

Abstract
--------

.. figure:: https://www.biography.com/.image/ar_1:1%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cg_face%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_300/MTE1ODA0OTcxNjI2MTA0MzMz/gustav-theodor-fechner-9292524-1-402.jpg
   :alt: Gustav Fechner (1801 - 1887)


Gustav Fechner was born in a small town in Germany where he graduated
from medical school (“New World Encyclopedia,” 2017). He was interested
in physics and later on was known as the founder of psychophysics. He
has underlined the key concepts of physics through his research and by
becoming a professor at the University of Leipzig in Germany. Between
the many published books and articles, a contemporary book, “The
Elements of Psychophysics” is well perceived as the study of the
relationship between physical stimulant and mental response. The book
portrays his new theories that are discovered and based on physics. His
work is still studied today to understand the experiments and thoughts
he had once found and displayed. While he continued conducting new
studies and teaching, he experienced an eye illness which resulted in a
long period of bed rest. Once Fechner was able to recover, he connected
himself to God and began to study philosophy. At last, Fechner became
closer to philosophy and continued to pursue this passion through books
and lectures.

Biography
---------

.. image:: https://study.com/cimages/videopreview/gustav-fechner-psychology-theory-and-explanation_110093.jpg
   :alt: University of Leipzig

University of Leipzig, where Fechner both studied and taught for numerous years

Gustav Theodor Fechner was born in a village in Gross Särchen, Germany
on April 19,1801 (“Encyclopedia Britannica,” 2018). His father died when
he was young. Later on, Fechner enrolled himself in the university of
Leipzig in 1807. He had received his medical degree in 1822 but decided
not to pursue medicine, instead began to write satire (“New World
Encyclopedia,” 2017). He later invested his interest in mathematics and
began to study physics. After being knowledgeable in his work, he was
known as a German physicist and philosopher who was a key figure in the
founding of psychophysics. He published his own books related to
psychology and physics.

In 1834, within a year after his marriage, Fechner was appointed as a
physics professor at the University of Leipzig in Germany (McGill, Moose
& Rehn, 1999). Several years after being a professor, he developed
health issues as he began to experience more than usual exhaustion. In
1839 he fell ill with an eye illness of partial blindness due to his
frequent gazing at the sun during one of his studies (McGill, Moose &
Rehn, 1999). Fechner was isolated and off work for a few years due to
which depression followed him.

By 1842, he began to recover and soon after he started to study
philosophy and discussed the idea of consciousness (“Encyclopedia
Britannica,” 2018). Later on, Fechner reached to experimental aesthetics
where he determined what shapes and sizes were aesthetically most
pleasing (“Encyclopedia Britannica,” 2018). From here on, he spent most
of his time doing public lectures and later on he died at the age of 86
in November 18, 1887 (“Encyclopedia Britannica,” 2018).

Published books and the Importance of Elements of Psychophysics
---------------------------------------------------------------

.. image:: https://images-na.ssl-images-amazon.com/images/I/510K8yXBE1L._SX329_BO1,204,203,200_.jpg
   :alt: Element of Psychophysics, Written by: Gustav Fechner

Element of Psychophysics, Written by: Gustav Fechner

Gustav Fechner can be considered an important individual in psychology
as well as physics and philosophy for his work with psychophysics. This
finding can be described to be the quantitative relationship between a
physical stimulant and the mental response and sensation. (“New World
Encyclopedia,” 2017) Psychophysics will be explained further into detail
later. Much of his research and time as a physicist was spent studying
this theory and further developing it. As Fechner concluded his work
associated with psychophysics he published various papers to explain and
support the developed theories.

During his time, Fechner had written various prevalent papers to
accompany his findings, the most notable being, “Elemente der
Psychophysik, 2 vol (Elements of Psychophysics)”. This book was first
published in 1860, establishing the importance of experimental
psychology and creating the first view and explanation of the theory of
psychophysics. The published book created a name for Fechner in the
field of psychology as he was accounted as one of the founders of modern
experimental psychology. (“Encyclopedia Britannica,” 2018) His research
not only developed a new theory but allowed the field to be studied in a
way never experienced before; experimentally and quantitatively.
Procedures in psychology using experimental and quantitative techniques
he developed are still used today. In the book, Fechner included an
equation to aid his explanation of psychophysics, more specifically the
theory of just-noticeable differences. This theory was originally
created by Ernst Heinrich Weber and further developed by Fechner. (“New
World Encyclopedia,” 2017) His work with psychophysics helped the field
of psychology be understood not only as a qualitative but also
quantitative science.

As Fechner further delved in his findings, he continued to publish
papers to follow his findings. Some additional papers include, Vorschule
der Aesthetik in 1876, which explained the basic principles of art, Das
Büchlein vom Leben nach dem Tod (The Book of Life After Death, 1836),
Uber die physikalische und philosophische Atomenlehre (The Physical and
Philosophical Atomic Doctrine, 1855) and more. (“New World
Encyclopedia,” 2017)

Key Accomplishments
-------------------

Fechner conceptualized that mind and body, though appearing to be
separate articles, are actually different sides of one single reality.
He also advanced experimental procedures which are still useful in
experimental psychology for measuring sensations in relation to the
physical magnitude of stimuli. Philosophically Fechner defended a monism
in which the one world can be seen in one way physically and in the
other mentally (“Encyclopedia Britannica,” 2018). Experimentally he
sought to confirm this vision by discovering close quantitative
relationships between conscious experience and physiological stimulus,
as a result, discovering the law that the intensity of a sensation
increases as the log of the stimulus conceptualizing psychophysical
relations. This law proved the existence of evidence-based connection
between body and psyche. This formula was named the Fechner-Weber law,
because it based on the theory of the just-noticeable difference,
advanced earlier by Ernst Heinrich Weber. He developed experimental
procedures for measuring sensations in relation to the physical
magnitude of stimuli ("Gustav Fechner," n.d.). He proposed the three
methods of measurement were the method of just-noticeable differences,
the method of constant stimuli, and the method of average error.
According to the authorities, the method of constant stimuli, called
also the method of right and wrong cases, has become the most important
of the three methods. In philosophy he was also an animist, maintaining
that life is manifest in all objects of the universe. Fechner called his
conception Day Vision, unlike his contemporary materialism – Night
Vision (“Markov, S.” 2018, September 30). His greatest achievement was
in the investigation of exact relationships in psychology and
aesthetics. He demonstrated that since the mind can be measurable and
understood mathematically, it is possible calculation in psychology. He
hoped to organize psychophysics and metaphysics in a way that united
philosophy and the human sciences. In 1865 Fechner’s interest turned to
the study of the basic aesthetic principles of art (“Gustav Fechner”
2014, April 02). Fechner’s experimental method became the basis for
experimental psychology and later inspired Wilhelm Wundt, who created
the first scientific Psychological laboratory.

Sigmund Freud regarded Fechner as the pioneer of psychophysics and a
founder of scientific and experimental psychology. He attended Fechner’s
lectures in Leipzig in 1874. He gave him him the title “The great G. T.
Fechner.” William James, who did not care for quantitative analysis or
the statistical approach in psychology, dismisses the psychophysical law
as an “idol of the den,” the psychological outcome of which is nothing
(“Markov, S.” 2018, September 30).

Psychophysics and the Different Experiments Done in Order to Prove Physical Stimuli and the Mental Aspect of Psychology
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. image:: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/5/51/Weber-Fechner_law_demo_-_dots.png
   :alt: Weber-Fechner Law Demo

*Above is an example of the Just-noticeable differences explained by the Weber-Fechner law. In the picture, there are four images containing different amount of dots. The bottom two pictures have 10 additional dots than its the corresponding picture from above. Between the left two pictures, where the images have 10 and 20 dots respectively, there is a visible difference. In contrast, on the two pictures from the right, the pictures contain 110 and 120 dots. When comparing those two images they look almost identical at first glance. This illustrates a just noticeable difference which is explained in the section below.* Image retrieved from `Wikipedia <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Weber–Fechner_law>`__.


Gustav Fechner did not have your typical scientific ‘upbringing’. Most
scientists experiment with other and work together with teams in order
to further their research and findings. After an accident where Fechner
almost essentially blinded himself for research, he isolated himself
from society for approximately three years, this is when he made his
largest discovery of psychophysics (Markov, 2018). His initial curiosity
began with philosophy, he believed that mind and matter are the same
thing, rather than ‘mind vs matter’; this was his main solution for the
ultimate philosophical problem according to Fechner. His hypothesis for
this solution was “mind and body are not regarded as a real dualism, but
are different sides of one reality” (Eval, 2018). Psychophysics is
essentially the study of the relationship between mental experiences and
physical stimuli (Eval, 2018). Fechner had taken Ernst Weber’s discovery
of the extent of magnitude of one specific stimulus results in a
noticeable change in sensations. Fechner applied Weber’s law to his
research and finding, connecting them to the measurement of of
sensations related to to a stimulus (Markov, 2018). This is what we now
call the ‘Fechner - Weber Law’. This law both helps quantitative
psychologists and philosophers withy the belief that the measurement of
sensations are in relation to a measured stimulus (Eval, 2018). He came
up with three different methods of measurements; just-noticeable
differences, the method of constant stimuli, and the method of average
error (Eval, 2018). Surprisingly enough, Fechner did not do any initial
experiments per say in order to come up with his theory, he simply
dreamt it and then pursued it. Ten years later, he wrote his book
‘Elements of Psychophysics” which explains his theory more in depth.

After many hours of research, it was very difficult to come across
experiments that Fechner had done in order to help prove his hypothesis
and findings. This may be due to the fact that he started with a
philosophical view, which then he was able to connect to different
aspects of physics in which he was teaching. His methodology conflicted
with pure data that should have been done in order to prove his
hypothesis and ideas more clearly. The correlation however to
psychophysics and physical stimuli and the mental aspect of psychology
has to do with the fact that they all relate to how much of a stimuli we
can detect and how we can then detect the differences between stimuli in
the environment with our sensory systems, including vision, auditory,
taste, smell, and pain (Eval, 2018). An example of this being eating a
nice cold watermelon on a hot summer’s day. The sensation of eating this
good, cold watermelon then relays back to our brain which essentially
what psychophysicists have been wondering. The relation between
something we are doing and the different processes that can occur as a
response.

Contemporary Assessments on Fechner’s Impact
--------------------------------------------

.. figure:: https://images-na.ssl-images-amazon.com/images/I/417yk7%2B5OlL._SX335_BO1,204,203,200_.jpg
   :alt: *Article written on Fechner's impact and work with Psychophysics*


In modern times, multiple psychologists have looked back on Fechner’s
work and discussed his crucial importance to the development of the
field. Many articles have been written which discuss his impact as well
as what has become of psychophysics since the era of Fechner. The
article “The Place of Psychophysics in Modern Neuroscience” by J.C.A.
Read of the Institute of Neuroscience at Newcastle University discusses
where psychophysics has gone since Fechner, as well as if the work of
early psychophysicists and their ideas are still relevant. Read argues
that while the small groups of human subjects generally used for
psychophysical studies may seem to come up with unreliable results, it
is still just as important to study humans as it is to study animals
(which has become a common practice since the creation of psychophysics
because multiple subjects can be used). The article also discusses
technological advancements and how they have and can further the role of
psychophysics and take research beyond where it has ever been before.
The invention of technology such as computers has helped early
psychophysical ideas become modernized and be improved for use in modern
psychophysics. Read states that early ideas of human psychophysics are
not without their issues. For example, early psychophysics generally
focused on judgements that were restricted to small sets of quantitative
data, which don’t necessarily display the full picture of how the human
brain interacts with physical stimuli. Despite this, Read does believe
that the ideas of early human psychophysics are still of relevant in the
world of psychology and neuroscience today (Read, 2015).

Another article, “Fechner: 150 years of Elemente der Psychophysik” by
David K. Robinson, celebrates the 150th anniversary of Fechner’s
revolutionary book on psychophysics. Robinson discusses the sheer
importance of Fechner in not only the creation of psychology but also it
becoming known as its own science. After Fechner’s work, other
scientists began to take their own steps, using Fechner as inspiration,
to further this new branch of science. Wilhelm Wundt, inspired by
Fechner, opened up what is known by many as the first ever psychology
lab, with psychological study being its sole purpose. Fechner’s law and
methods for psychophysical measurement have been used by scientists
studying psychology ever since the publication of Elemente der
Psychophysik (Robinson, n.d). Even to this day, Fechner’s importance and
influence can be seen in most psychological work.

Contemporary assessments on Gustav Fechner
------------------------------------------

Fechner had a large contemporary impact on psychology. His work and
influence can be seen throughout psychology; however, it can be argued
that his influence is far more methodological than theoretical, as most
works tend to be from other historical psychologists. This made finding
contemporary assessments on his work incredibly difficult. Although much
research was conducted on the psychologist, finding notable, and
relevant articles throughout the databases we learned about in class and
also through additional databases posted on Waterloo’s Library website
was unsuccessful. Two appointments were made with one of the librarian
liaisons, (library assistant) who specializes in psychology. The
librarian attempted to go through the databases in the similar ways
tested before, albeit far more efficiently and extensively. Although
again no major articles to reference were found. Despite little to no
success, an abundant amount was learned about navigating the databases
and also how to sign out books which in regards to this assignment
included, Life After Death, written by Fechner. Unfortunately, the book,
although seeming quite promising, was of no help.

Assessment aside, Fechner's work definitely had a large impact on the
psychology community. Although not overtly discussed, fechner's work
with the Weber-Fechner law, quantifying perceived change in stimuli
compared to the actual mathematical representation of said change, is
likely his most commonly used psychological contribution. The law is
still used today as a common source of data and as frequently been used
to support theories. The law has been questioned and debated by many
psychologists overtime. In a rather recent article, published by
Elsevier Science, (The neural basis of the Weber-Fechner Law: a
logarithmic mental number line - 2003) uses studies based on number
neurons to contradict the linear calculations of relative stimuli that
uphold the Weber fechner law. The article declares that the calculations
are more accurate when done logarithmically rather than linearly as
Weber had suggested. This criticism of weber's theory actually supports
fechner's interpretation of the law.

Some of his other large contributions are methods of constant stimuli,
methods of bisection and related psychophysical tools.

Intro to the Life and Work of Fechner: Video
--------------------------------------------

**Below you will find a 4 minute video; including important details
regarding Fechner's life and work. Is is aided by visuals, and a concise
summary voiced as an addition to better your understanding**

.. raw:: html

   <div>

.. raw:: html

   <iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/gKMBLphir2s" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen>

.. raw:: html

   </iframe>

.. raw:: html

   </div>


Bibliography
------------

Encyclopedia Britannica. (2018, April 12). Gustav Fechner. Retrieved
from https://www.britannica.com/biography/Gustav-Fechner

Encyclopedia Britannica. (2017, April 18). Psychophysics. Retrieved from
https://www.britannica.com/science/psychophysics

Eval (decodeURIComponent('document.write('Smith');')). (n.d.). Gustav
Theodor Fechner. Retrieved from
http://psychology.jrank.org/pages/242/Gustav-Theodor-Fechner.html

Gustav Fechner. (n.d.). Retrieved from
http://www.newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/Gustav\_Fechner

Gustav Fechner: 150 years of Elemente der Psychophysik. (n.d.).
Retrieved November 9, 2018, from
http://psycnet.apa.org/fulltext/2010-24691-003.html

Gustav Theodor Fechner Biography. (n.d.). Retrieved from
https://www.enotes.com/topics/gustav-theodor-fechner#biography-gustav-theodor-fechner-480222

Markov, S. (2018, September 30). Sergey Markov. Retrieved from
https://geniusrevive.com/en/gustav-fechner-founder-of-psychophysics/

Read, J. C. A. (2015). The place of human psychophysics in modern
neuroscience. Neuroscience, 296, 116–129.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.05.036

