Granville Stanley Hall
======================

*by Saron Yakob, Kendra Sleeman, Catherine Bergs, and Bryanna Jackson*
----------------------------------------------------------------------

.. raw:: html

   <p style="text-align:center;">

.. raw:: html

   </p>

Granville Stanley Hall

Abstract
--------

Granville Stanley Hall greatly influenced the relationship of American
academia to psychological study. He launched two organizations that
continue to promote empirical psychological study and scholarship to
this day. Hall’s understanding of life’s stages, particularly
adolescence and senescence has been critical to our current
understanding of youth and old age.

Early Life and Education
------------------------

Granville Stanley Hall was born on February 1, 1844, in Massachusetts.
His father, Granville Bascom Hall, was a politician. His mother, Abigail
Beals, went to school at Albany Female Seminary, then proceeded to
become a teacher. Hall was raised in a religious household, and at first
wanted to become a minister. When he graduated from Williams College in
1867, Hall completed his seminary training. But his time in the clergy
was short-lived; after “ten weeks as a church pastor [Hall] decided to
leave the ministry”. Hall then went on to teach “literature and
philosophy” at Antioch College from 1872-1876. In 1878 he was given the
first Ph.D in psychology in the United States. Hall studied
physiological psychology in Germany. When Hall returned to the States he
became very popular, being invited to give lectures at Harvard and Johns
Hopkins University. After these series of lectures, Hall secured a
faculty position lecturing on psychology at Johns Hopkins University in
1882. `source <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1483855/>`__

Key Discoveries
---------------

Granville Stanley Hall is perhaps one of the best-known psychologists in
American history. Today, he is remembered for his influential
contributions to the field including founding the first American
psychology laboratory at the John Hopkins University, and representing a
major transitional period in psychological thought. G. Stanley Hall
earned a PhD in psychology, becoming the first American to do so. He
became the first President of the American Psychological Association in
1892.
`source <https://www.verywellmind.com/g-stanley-hall-biography-2795507>`__

In psychological thinking, Hall’s research marked a transitional period
from thinking of human psychology as fairly static to viewing it as
based in developmental stages. His thoughts were marked by the impact of
more contemporary thinking in the 20th century. His work was valuable to
a number of eugenics-based organizations. Following his family’s death
in 1890, Hall was professionally prolific. He wrote widely and founded
several newspapers and organization as well. In the following years G.
Stanley Hall was appointed as the American Psychological Association’s
first president.

One of his greatest achievement was to early psychology development and
growth. “By 1898, out of the 54 PhD degrees awarded in the United
States, Hall had supervised 30. Lewis Terman, John Dewey and James
McKeen Cattell are some of those individuals who studied under his
impact”
`source <https://www.verywellmind.com/g-stanley-hall-biography-2795507>`__
He and his students produced over 190 questionnaires that were
instrumental in fostering an increase in interest in child development
research. Hall furthermore used these questionnaires at Harvard to write
two important papers: one on `children’s lies
(1891) <https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/08919402.1891.10533933>`__
and the other on `children’s minds
(1893) <https://archive.org/details/contentsofchildr00hall/page/n8>`__.

Hall founded the first journal in the fields of child psychology and
educational psychology, the Pedagogical Seminary (later the Journal of
Genetic Psychology). “He has written 489 works covering most of the
major psychological areas, including Senescence, the Last Half of Life
(1922) and Jesus, the Son, in the Light of Psychology (1917). A
psychologist’s life and confessions (1923) was his autobiography.”

Professional Activities
-----------------------

Granville Stanley Hall’s first published book particularly focused on
German culture. Despite beginning his studies and works on English as
well as philosophy, he later became a Professor at John Hopkins
University, for psychology and pedagogy. The American Journal of
Psychology also became one of his several achievements, launched in
1887.

.. raw:: html

   <p style="text-align:center;">

|Hall|

.. raw:: html

   </p>

*Johns Hopkins University, Main Building*

`Adolescence <https://archive.org/details/adolescenceitsp01hallgoog/page/n7>`__,
focuses explicitly on the theory of adolescence, as it is an important
“level” of life. Hall refers to the adolescence period (ages 12 - 25) as
“strum and drang”, also known as, “storm and stress”. It’s about how
easily our actions and emotions can contradict. The main aspect of this
stage of life is on reaching a certain level of maturity but still
developing after reaching this stage if life.
`source <https://prezi.com/hv5nqc32xvfa/theory-of-adolescence-by-g-stanley-hall/>`__

His book called
`Senescence <https://archive.org/details/senescencelastha00halliala/page/n6>`__
highlights the “last half of life”. Senescence is when you reach the age
of 60, and age older and older. It is the time of our life that leads to
retirement and ultimately death
`source <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1483854/>`__. The
book and Hall’s theory of senescence concludes that "death is the end of
the body and also the soul, which overall gives us the image that death
allows a new life of joy, as well as love
`source <https://www.verywellmind.com/g-stanley-hall-biography-2795507>`__.

Contemporary Assessments
------------------------

Much of G. Stanley Hall’s work remains relevant to this day. Having
inspired a cultural shift towards viewing adolescence as a separate life
stage from childhood and adulthood, Hall is often called the “Father of
Adolescence.” He brought the German psychological idea of adolescence as
a time of “storm and stress” to American psychology, differentiating the
extreme emotions and behaviours of adolescence from the criminal
activity or mental illness of adults, and laying the ground for the
pop-culture stereotype of the moody “troubled teen.” He also articulated
difference between male and female social groups in adolescence,
attributing physical aggression to males and relational aggression
(i.e. rumour spreading) to females. This insight on teen social groups
has been helpful to psychologists and comedians alike, laying the basis
for such cultural classics as *Mean Girls*, Tina Fey’s seminal work.
Hall encouraged educators to view adolescence as an opportunity to
intentionally shape individual and cultural development and contribute
to advantageous human evolution. His approach to children and youth
programming encouraged the launch of programming like the YMCA and YWCA
that emphasize physical health, team building, and community building.
His perspective is part of why we continue to encourage children and
youth toward team sports and extracurriculars. Hall also identified old
age as a separate life-stage. With an aging population in the 21st
century, this identification and the study of this separate life-stage
is increasingly significant, emphasizing the importance of providing
seniors with positive social relationships, personal affirmation, and
opportunities to contribute to society even as their physical abilities
decline.

Hall’s long term influence on psychology also spread beyond the concepts
of life stages. His launch of the American Journal of Psychology,
American Psychological Association, and America’s first psychological
laboratory essentially make him the father of American psychological
academia. In fact, he directly oversaw the doctoral work of tens of the
the USA’s first doctoral psychology students. He also promoted the works
of Sigmund Freud and Alfred Adler, providing them with necessary
legitimacy that helped ensure their influence on psychological thought.
Without Hall’s influence, the current landscape scientific psychology
would certainly look very different!

.. raw:: html

   <p style="text-align:center;">

.. raw:: html

   </p>

*Sigmund Freud’s 1909 Visit to Clark University*

Unfortunately, not all of his work was so positively impactful . Hall’s
opinions about the differences between boys and girls lend legitimacy to
harmful stereotypes. Modern psychologists criticize the “storm and
stress” idea, noting that not *all* adolescents fit that mold. And worst
of all, Hall was strongly in favour of eugenics (intentionally breeding
“superior” humans - think Nazis and Aryanism, or the forced
sterilization of “troubled” youths and criminals in some parts of the
world in the early to mid 20th century).

An enjoyable video about G. Stanley Hall:

.. container::

   .. raw:: html

      <p style="text-align:center;">

   .. raw:: html

      <iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/WocrCTKsIRs" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen>

   .. raw:: html

      </iframe>

   .. raw:: html

      </p>

Like every historical figure, Granville Stanley Hall `contains
multitudes <http://daypoems.net/plainpoems/1900.html>`__. Modern
psychologists must approach his work critically, while maintaining
respect for his memory.

Further Reading
===============

The full text of *Adolescence: Its Psychology and its Relations to
Physiology, Anthropology, Sociology, Sex, Crime, Religion and Education*

https://archive.org/details/adolescenceitsps01hall/page/n9

English translation of Freud’s lecture series at Clark Univeristy *About
Psychoanalysis* https://www.rasch.org/over.htm

Bibliography
============

.. _early-life-and-education-1:

Early Life and Education
------------------------

G. Stanley Hall. (2019, September 9). Retrieved from
`https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/G._Stanley_Hall. <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/G._Stanley_Hall>`__.

Parry, M. (2006, July). G. Stanley Hall: psychologist and early
gerontologist. Retrieved from
`https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1483855/. <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1483855/>`__

.. _key-discoveries-1:

Key Discoveries
---------------

Cherry, K. (2019, August 28). G. Stanley Hall’s Important Contributions
to Psychology. Retrieved from
`https://www.verywellmind.com/g-stanley-hall-biography-2795507. <https://www.verywellmind.com/g-stanley-hall-biography-2795507>`__

G. Stanley Hall. (2019, September 9). Retrieved from
`https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/G._Stanley_Hall. <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/G._Stanley_Hall>`__

The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica. (2019, April 20). G. Stanley
Hall. Retrieved from
`https://www.britannica.com/biography/G-Stanley-Hall. <https://www.britannica.com/biography/G-Stanley-Hall>`__

.. _professional-activities-1:

Professional Activities
-----------------------

Cherry, K. (2019, August 28). G. Stanley Hall’s Important Contributions
to Psychology. Retrieved from
`https://www.verywellmind.com/g-stanley-hall-biography-2795507. <https://www.verywellmind.com/g-stanley-hall-biography-2795507>`__

.. _contemporary-assessments-1:

Contemporary Assessments
------------------------

About Clark. (n.d.). Retrieved from
`https://www2.clarku.edu/research/archives/archives/g-stanley-hall.cfm. <https://www2.clarku.edu/research/archives/archives/g-stanley-hall.cfm>`__

G. Stanley Hall (1844–1924). (n.d.). Retrieved from
`https://education.stateuniversity.com/pages/2026/Hall-G-Stanley-1844-1924.html. <https://education.stateuniversity.com/pages/2026/Hall-G-Stanley-1844-1924.html>`__

(n.d.). Retrieved from
`https://www3.nd.edu/~rbarger/www7/hall.html. <https://www3.nd.edu/~rbarger/www7/hall.html>`__

(n.d.). Retrieved from
`https://psycnet.apa.org/record/2006-12691-005. <https://psycnet.apa.org/record/2006-12691-005>`__

About Clark. (n.d.). Retrieved from
`https://www2.clarku.edu/research/archives/archives/g-stanley-hall.cfm. <https://www2.clarku.edu/research/archives/archives/g-stanley-hall.cfm>`__

G. Stanley Hall (1844–1924). (n.d.). Retrieved from
`https://education.stateuniversity.com/pages/2026/Hall-G-Stanley-1844-1924.html. <https://education.stateuniversity.com/pages/2026/Hall-G-Stanley-1844-1924.html>`__

Parry M. (2006). G. Stanley Hall: psychologist and early gerontologist.
American journal of public health, 96(7), Retrieved from
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1483855/

The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica. (2019, April 20). G. Stanley
Hall. Retrieved from
`https://www.britannica.com/biography/G-Stanley-Hall. <https://www.britannica.com/biography/G-Stanley-Hall>`__

Young, J., & Lee, S. F. (n.d.). Retrieved from
`https://ahp.apps01.yorku.ca/tag/g-stanley-hall/. <https://ahp.apps01.yorku.ca/tag/g-stanley-hall/>`__

Images
------

D’Alembert, J. (Photographer). (2016). *Johns Hopkins University, Main
Building.* [Photograph]. Retrieved from
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Johns_Hopkins_University.jpg

(1909) *Sigmund Freud’s 1909 Visit to Clark University.* Retrived from
       https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Hall_Freud_Jung_in_front_of_Clark_1909.jpg

(1910) *Portrait of Granville Stanley Hall.* [Photograph]. Retrieved
       from
       https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/b/b4/G._Stanley_Hall.jpg

.. |Hall| image:: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/9/92/Johns_Hopkins_University.jpg

