John B. Watson
==============

Authors: Maddie Cannon, Arindam Sharma, Nakaya Dennis, Asmitha Ajaikumar
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Date: December 8, 2019
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. figure:: https://external-content.duckduckgo.com/iu/?u=http%3A%2F%2Ftotallyhistory.com%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F2014%2F01%2FJohn-B-Watson.jpg&f=1&nofb=1
   :alt: John Watson

   John Watson

Summary
-------

John B. Watson (born January 9th, 1878 - died September 25th, 1958 at
the age of 80) is an American psychologist who classified and
broadcasted the study of behaviourism, a psychological approach which
emphasizes scientific and objective methods of investigation. He is also
commonly known as the father of behaviorism. Watson’s theory of
behaviourism has had a long lasting impact on the nature vs. nurture
debate, more exclusively the strong role early experiences play in
shaping personality. Once he received his Ph.D in psychology from the
University of Chicago, he became a professor of psychology at the Johns
Hopkins University and later established a laboratory for research in
animal psychology. He is remembered for his research on the conditioning
process, involving the “Little Albert” experiment in which he revealed
that emotional reactions could be conditioned in people.

Early Like and Education
------------------------

Dr. John Broadus Watson, born on January 9th, 1878, raised in Travelers
Rest, South Carolina, where his parents, Pickens Butler and Emma Kesaih
(nee Roe) Watson owned a farm. John’s mother was a very religious woman
who was against drinking, smoking, and dancing. While John was growing
up, his mother forced these harsh religious beliefs that pushed him all
the way into becoming an atheist. John’s father on the other hand was a
heavy alcoholic. He had left John and his mother when John was only 13
years old. This was something that made John resent his father entirely.
In order for the Watson’s to crawl out of the depths of poverty, John’s
mother decided that she was going to sell the farm and move to
Greenville, South Carolina where John could actually succeed and make a
decent living.

Greenville gave the Watson family so much more than the isolated farm
did. There, they were introduced to all different types of people, which
in turn, John used these different types of people to cultivate his
theories on psychology. John understood the fact that in order for him
to further his studies in psychology he needed to go to university.
Furman University in Greenville, South Carolina was the one that he
chose despite this poor academic performance and him being arrested
twice during his time in high school, He used his mother’s connection to
get him into the university. John considered himself as a quiet, lazy,
and disobedient student. He tried some psychology courses at Furman’s
but failed miserably at them. His transition from the countryside to the
city left him with weak social skills. Once he entered college at 16, he
excelled in classes other’s simply failed at. Watson held a few jobs on
campus that helped him pay for his tuition at the university. In
retrospect, John still saw himself as “antisocial” and “awkward” which
left him with not many friends. After graduating at Furman University,
he went on to spend a year at “Batesburg Institute”, a name he gave to a
one-room school in Greenville. At “Batesburg Institute”, John was not
only the principal, but the janitor, and the labourer for the school.

After petitioning the President of the University of Chicago, he was
enrolled into the university. His petition to the President was a key
successor in him inserting himself into the world of psychology. He
began studying philosophy under many professors like John Dewey, Jacques
Loeb, Henry Herbert Donaldson, and James Rowland Angell. The four of
them shaped Watson into developing a highly descriptive analysis of
behaviour that Watson would later call “behaviorism” or also known as
behavioural psychology. During his college experience, Watson met many
professors and colleagues that would help into becoming a well known
psychologist. Watson’s peers played an important part in the role of his
success in developing psychology into an actual field of study and his
understanding of behaviorism. Watson explained behaviorism as a
methodology could transform psychology into a science. All John Watson
wanted to do was make psychology more scientifically acceptable, and
that he did.

Professional Activities
-----------------------

After graduating with a master’s degree at the age of 21, Watson spent a
year teaching grade school. He then entered the University of Chicago to
study philosophy with John Dewey however, he soon decided to go into a
different academic field. He then considered researching on the
physiology of a dog’s brain with a racial biologist but later choose the
field of psychology. In 1903 Watson presented his dissertation at the
University of Chicago and then remained there as a research professor
who focused on learning about sensory inputs in animals. Watson for his
doctoral dissertation studied brain myelination and learning in rats
with a resulting paper called “Animal Education: An Experimental study
on the Psychical Development of the White rat, correlated with the
growth of its `“nervous
system” <https://archive.org/details/animaleducation00watsgoog/page/n5>`__,
through which he showed that there was a relation between myelination
and learning.

Following his graduation with a doctorate, Watson decided to stay at the
University of Chicago and one of the major works he did was a set of
ethological studies of sea birds. It was done in dry tortuous islands in
Florida where he studied many aspects of the birds’ behaviour. For four
years, these extensive studies were carried out and they were some of
the earliest examples of what would later become known as “ethology”.
One of the first examples of the ethogram which was an in-dept record of
the naturally occurring behaviour of an organism was the study of
`bird’s
behaviour <https://archive.org/details/jstor-4070324/page/n1>`__. Due to
his reputation as a top researcher in animal behaviour, he got a
position at John Hopkins University. Where he was appointed as the chair
of the psychology department but was later asked to leave.

After leaving his teaching profession, Watson got into the field of
advertising, he started working for an American advertising agency of J.
Walter Thompson. He began learning about the many aspects of the
advertising business from the basics and even worked as a shoe salesman
in a department store. In spite of entering a new field of work, he rose
into an executive position of vice-presidency in a span of only two
years. Where he also initiated many successful advertising campaigns
which included Ponds cold cream and Maxwell House coffee ads. Watson
also served as the president of the American Psychological
Association(APA) and received a gold medal for his contributions.
Watson’s most influential and outstanding work was his study of
emotions. His other important works include the book `“Conditioned
Emotional
Reactions” <http://psychclassics.yorku.ca/Watson/emotion.htm>`__ which
was done with Rosalie Rayner in 1920 and the `“Psychological care of
Infant and
child” <https://openlibrary.org/books/OL6714215M/Psychological_care_of_infant_and_child>`__
that was published in 1928.

Key Accomplishments and Discoveries
-----------------------------------

In 1915, Watson was the president of the American Psychological
Association (APA), the youngest at the time. Around 42 years later, he
was awarded by them for the work he had done in psychology. Watson
carried out multiple researches and experiments throughout his life’s
span. He is specifically known for conducting the “The Little Albert
Experiment”,

.. figure:: https://amiraeltaggy.files.wordpress.com/2014/02/url.jpg
   :alt: little Albert

   little Albert

which was done on an infant, to test reactions to stimulus and other
classical conditioning. He was also known for the “Kerplunk” experiment,
in which he had done on rats, to test voluntary (controlled) responses.
The following video provides a brief overview of this work.

.. container::

   .. raw:: html

      <iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/7LCCq4JIqes" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen>

   .. raw:: html

      </iframe>

Watson was given the name father of behaviourism because of an article
that he had published in 1913 by the name of `“Psychology as the
Behaviorist Views
It” <https://psycnet-apa-org.proxy.lib.uwaterloo.ca/fulltext/1994-27851-001.html>`__
or the “Behaviorist Manifesto.” In this article, Watson talks about the
controlling of behavior and also objective experimental branch of
natural sciences. In the article Watson confessed about the biases in
regards to the questions. There was also a lot of criticism following
the article about Watson lack of evidence to support his claim. Watson
also did some work on language, he then came to the conclusion that
language was a manipulative habit. He also talks about trial and error
and its relation to learning.

As mentioned above `“Psychological care of Infant and
child” <https://psycnet.apa.org/record/1928-02003-000>`__ was also one
of the greatest work from Watson. This book gave Watson the attention
that he had needed to be introduced into understanding children. It
focused on sexual education and also the care of infants. It talked
about where sexual education should begin and Watson stated that it was
with parents. Furthermore, within the book he talked about unlearned
behaviors

.. figure:: https://i.gr-assets.com/images/S/compressed.photo.goodreads.com/books/1536000855l/4337698.jpg
   :alt: Psychological care of Infant and child

   Psychological care of Infant and child

Contemporary Assessments
------------------------

Nowadays, John Watson’s experiment like “Little Albert” would not be
allowed since it caused a great ethical concern. John Watson used the
9-month old infant as an experimental subject to see whether he could
condition the baby to fear furry animals. However, there was no follow
up or deconditioning. There is no evidence Watson cared much abou how
the phobias he conditioned might affect little Albert’s life.

Also, the infant’s health at the start of the experiment is unknown.
Medical records verify that Merriette had `congenital
hydrocephalus <https://rarediseases.info.nih.gov/diseases/6682/congenital-hydrocephalus>`__,
and “recounted in disturbing detail treatments the child was subjected
to during his first year of life, including repeated cranial and lumbar
punctures to reduce fluid buildup in the brain” (Deangelis, 2012, para.
7). This supported the evidence that Little Albert was Douglas Merritte
and suggests that Watson was aware of the medical conditions “Little
Albert” was experiencing.

Lastly, over the years Watson’s personal character has been called into
question through the moral (or lack of) in his experiments. This is due
to the fact that he had had an affair with one of his students, later
divorced his wife and was then fired from working at the John Hopkins
University. There were also rumors (Aalai, 2015, para. 8) going around
that he was fired for conducting sex related experiments. All of the bad
publicity gave him a poor reputation as a person. What’s more, there is
documentation that suggests that Watson obstructed information to
strengthen the study’s findings, possibly “reasoning that an
unresponsive child would provide a better baseline for later strong
reactions and help deflect accusations of child maltreatment”
(DeAngelis, 2012, para. 2). When teachers introduce John Watson today,
he is often taught as a tale of warning to students that “men of
science” could do anything that they wanted without taking
responsibility or applying conventional standards of ethics. Not only
does this confront the basic uses of experimental ethics, but it urges
us to challenge the work due to the possibility of `medical
misogyny <https://www.dictionary.com/browse/misogyny>`__, the likelihood
of scientific fraud and protection of disabled.

References
^^^^^^^^^^

`Aalai, A. (2015, November 20). Rethinking John B. Watson's
Legacy <https://www.psychologytoday.com/ca/blog/the-first-impression/201511/rethinking-john-b-watsons-legacy>`__

`Cherry, K. (2019, March 9). Pioneering Psychologist John B. Watson and
Behaviourism <https://www.verywellmind.com/john-b-watson-biography-1878-1958-2795550>`__

`Deangelis, R. T. (2012, March). Was ‘Little Albert’ ill during the
famed conditioning
study? <https://www.apa.org/monitor/2012/03/little-albert>`__

`John B. Watson.
(n.d.). <https://www.newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/John_B._Watson>`__

`Mcleod, S. (2017, February 5). Behaviorist
Approach <https://www.simplypsychology.org/behaviorism.html>`__

`Oelze, P. (2018, April 11). John B. Watson And
Behaviorism. <https://www.betterhelp.com/advice/psychologists/john-b-watson-and-behaviorism/>`__

`PBS. (n.d.). A Science Odyssey: John. B
Watson <http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/aso/databank/entries/bhwats.html>`__

`Team, G. T. E. (2011, November 11). John Watson
(1878-1958). <https://www.goodtherapy.org/famous-psychologists/john-watson.html>`__
